once around the hies star
cluster hies is the nearest open cluster
to the solar system and as such you can
see it over quite a wide area of the sky
to find it you take the three stars of
Orion's Belt as pointers and go up and
right from them and you will get to the
bright star older Baron which has a
characteristic orangey red color and
that seems to be at the corner of a
vshape which marks the face of Taurus
the Bull and the rest of the members of
the hies make up the rest of that
V and are much further away than older
Baron older Baron is really quite near
to us um at about 65 light years which
is uh two and a half times closer than
the main cluster itself so it's just a
line of site
thing so the hes
themselves are sufficiently spread out
that there was no danger of them being
confused with a comet and so Charles
Messier didn't put them in his catalog
but they turn up in three others they're
marked as Coldwell 41 that's Patrick
Moore's catalog cander 50 or melot 25
and we got a lovely picture and a little
uh inverted star map showing the layout
of the the face of Taurus the Bull the
hiades
cluster now together with a sister
cluster of the pades that are both in
the constellation of Taurus these are
supposed to Mark a feature called the
Golden Gate of the ecliptic and that's
because all the planets on their Journey
around the sky pass between these two
clusters as does the Sun and in fact in
Antiquity the sun would have been placed
in the sky just between these two and to
the Equinox um and so it marked the
beginning of the year so this was seen
as a very important passage for the
stars and planets or the Sun and planets
to go through between these two star
clusters and begin their Journey around
the
sky some of the statistics about the
hies well just 150 light years away I
think the most modern number is
153 and the core of the cluster
containing 500
stars is concentrated over a region of
about 10 light years in diameter and
those 500 Stars add up to about 400
solar masses the majority of these stars
are fairly modest um and we'll see
why the full extent though is about
three times that size 33 light years and
there's perhaps another 500 stars to be
found in and around the outer reaches of
the cluster
it's about 625 million years old and
that's old for a star cluster um it's
getting on for the maximum limit we'll
come to that as we go through the
presentation and because
it's only been in existence 625 million
years not the 4.6 billion that the sun
has been around the composition of the
Stars has formed from a cloud of rather
more enriched uh material so the
universe gradually gets dirtier as time
goes on hydrogen and converted to helium
so the proportion of helium goes up as
stars do that and they also for giant
stars make the other heavier elements
and these are present in somewhat larger
numbers in the material of these stars
there in the sun because they were
formed much more
recently now the Hodes is probably
related to The Beehive cluster about
which I have another talk The Beehive
cluster also known as
prpi these have the same
age the same enhanced metallicity the
same composition and the same proper
motion across the sky and the same
trajectory around the Galaxy so it seems
that they may have both been part of uh
a common origin somewhere along the line
it's very hard to be Serv certain about
these things trying to trace the orbits
backwards runs into the difficulties
with mathematical
chaos we also see that the
hiades cluster might be associated with
a whole lot of extra stars that seem to
also be moving through space together
and this was uh first noted back in 1869
by Richard Proctor he spotted that the
proper motions of these Stars was all
very similar
and uh the idea was that maybe there had
been a hiyes supercluster at some point
that broke up somehow and perhaps that's
where the Beehive and the hies
separated but only about 15% of the
these wandering stars that are moving
around the Galaxy on this similar
trajectory are chemically similar the
other 85% don't seem to fit so there's
some doubt over exactly what's going on
on here and it's possible that the
cluster and all of the other objects
that are moving in this way are being
influenced by the rotation of the outer
edge of the bar across the middle of the
Milky Way so we have a barred spiral
shown here that's not the Milky Way we
can't take a photo like that because
we're stuck inside it so this is another
galaxy that we think is roughly the same
shape as The Milky Way galaxy with this
extended bar feature and it may be the
tidal effect of that bar that is causing
these guys to move in this similar
manner I've got this map here which
shows the sun in the center and goes out
to 100 parex so 325 and a bit light
years and we've got the hies star
cluster up off to the left there and
some other groupings in particular
there's the UR major co-moving group uh
those are also a group of stars about 50
of them that all seem to be traveling in
uh the same direction not related to the
hiades um but this particular smaller
cluster the Earth major co-moving group
is definitely seeming to be breaking up
and
dispersing so that shows you how wide an
area the hies really occupies there
quite an extended structure and when we
look at the masses of the stars and the
distribution of masses in the hies
cluster something strange is going on at
First Sight clusters form out of the
collapse of clouds of gas and dust um in
a pulse of star formation over a very
short period and that should create a
full range of solar masses from the very
largest hot Stars you only get a few of
those because nature finds it difficult
to make the really big ones so the
distribution is shown here we expect 3
6% of the Stars to be super Giants 08 To
Be Giants then the two to four solar
mass ones round
3% ones like the sun maybe uh in in
larger numbers and then the orange and
red dwarfs
Dominate and of course you should also
get a whole lot of failed Stars brown
dwarf stars which didn't achieve the
necessary minimum Mass to kick off
nuclear fusion those should be formed in
even larger numbers along with a whole
lot of gas giant planets not attached to
Stars free
floating but it seems that the hies
cluster is deficient at both ends of the
scale it doesn't have the large Stars
neither does it seem to have very many
of the small ones
but there is an explanation for this and
it comes in two parts really the first
part relates to the life cycle of stars
something I've talked about many times
in these
lectures and that is that the big stars
live fast and die young so actually any
stars that were in the giant range the
hot blue stars and even the hottest of
the white
stars have gone through their life
cycles in 10
100 million years maybe a couple of
hundred million years and died um as
Supernova
explosions only the smaller
stars have the life expectancy to still
be around 625 million years on and the
hiades now only has stars in the main
sequence ordinary stars of 2.3 times the
mass of the Sun or less so definitely
the thes four bottom rungs of our
Stellar Mass
ladder and you can see that if you plot
the her sprung Russell diagram for Star
clusters you can see that as a star
cluster gets older the turnoff point
where the stars are beginning to cease
to operate on the main sequence
beginning to consume
uh the hydrogen in their caes and evolve
into red giant is this turnoff point and
uh they cease to be on that diagonal
line and go over to the red giant side
of the diagram and uh that sort of burns
down like a fuse Burning Down the older
the cluster gets the uh more of
the stars have managed to achieve that
um and only the smaller stars are
left so what we've got left in the iodes
well we've got four four aass stars at
around two and a half solar masses that
are now swollen up to red giants and
those are some of the ones that you see
as the bright members of the
vshape um they uh get very bright
because they're large they have a large
surface area so even though they have
cooled the total amount of light coming
from that much larger radiating area is
uh way more than it would be for a
similar star that was uh similar
temperature but
smaller so we also have eight white
dwarfs that have been located and these
are probably the result of slightly
bigger Stars around the three solar mass
range that uh have gone past the red
giant phase puffed off their outer
layers as planetary nebula and uh
collapsed down to a white dwarf core so
this is the end stage of the Evolution
for them they will no longer carry out
nuclear fusion they'll just sit there
cooling slowly through
eternity so this explains why there are
none of the very large stars in the
hiades and the reason that there are no
small Stars relates to a phenomenon
called Mass
segregation Close Encounters due to the
chaotic orbits of these stars all
whirling around their Common Center of
mass results in the massive stars
sinking into the center of the cluster
and the smaller ones being scattered to
the outside it's all down to the fact
that gradually the energy ends up
equally split between all the components
a equip partition law of energy says
that energy will flatten out and so the
energy of the large stars and the energy
of the small Stars has to be the same
but energy kinetic energy of motion is a
half mv^ s so with more mass you need
less velocity to have the same energy
and so large Stars end up with lower
velocity and small orbits and small
Stars end up kicked into High Velocity
Long orbits and the smallest ones may
end up being kicked out of the cluster
entirely in a process called
evaporation so most small star clusters
disappear after perhaps only 50 million
years and we've got an array of
different star clusters here and you can
see that some of them have these
concentrated centers and less powerful
Styles towards the outside some are more
broken up than others and so you can
sort of go through and try and rank
these into their degree of evolution of
the uh Mass segregation and the
evaporation but larger star clusters can
hang around for longer and a big star
cluster like the hiades with as as many
stars as it had is certainly managing to
hang on getting on for this sort of uper
limit of around a billion years where we
seem to think that uh there aren't
really very many clusters older than
that this is because the Stars gradually
get kicked out and the future for the
hies is that it will continue to lose
Stars they will be shed out into the
Galaxy following near misses and
gravitational slingshots hurling them
out of the
Galaxy and as that happens the mass of
the cluster is slightly reduced each
time and of course that means that the
grip on the remaining stars is less and
so gradually
the uh thing will be easier to escape
from and you end up with just a tiny
little Central few Stars tightly bound
together um evolving on their merry way
but most of the cluster will have
disappeared certainly we think that the
lack of brown dwarfs in these clusters
is because they get ejected very early
on along with any free floating planets
so we should find a lot of these ejected
free floating Rogue brown dwarf and uh
giant planets wandering around it's just
that they're extremely hard to
find now in terms of planets Epsilon
Tori a the Bulls Eye Has a gas giant
exoplanet um that's the other one at the
other side of the V from Al dearon and
this was the first planet to be located
in any open cluster so a bit of a record
holder and since we found that one
several more have been located and
there's a full range of hot Jupiters
down through Jupiter sized planets and
even down to mini Neptunes that have
been detected including some multiple
Planet systems so it seems that as the
techniques are improving we're finding
more and more of the solar system like
AR Ms wherever we
look and so finally just to wrap up with
the hiyes I mentioned the Golden Gate of
the ecliptic we've got the highes the V
shape on the left with alabar and the
top left of the V and we've got the
pades cluster down to the bottom right
there and that's the planet Mars in the
center moving through the Golden
Gate fascinating to see that so thank
you very much for listening and I hope
you've enjoyed that
and we'll be back with another
astronomical object in another talk